feat: added migration guide kapt->ksp (#5429)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/ksp/ksp-kapt-migration.md

[//]: # (title: Migrate from kapt to KSP)

> [//]: # (description: Guide on how to migrate annotation processors from kapt to KSP.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[//]: # (description: Learn how to migrate annotation processors in your Kotlin project from kapt to KSP.)
```
[Corrected since description element is also valid!] Since this will appear in search results, let's make the entry active! :)

> In this guide you will learn how to migrate your annotation processors from [kapt](kapt.md) to [KSP](ksp-overview.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you will learn how to migrate annotation processors in your project from [kapt](kapt.md) to [KSP](ksp-overview.md) so that your project can take full advantage of Kotlin features and improve build performance.
```
It's a nice intro but it would be even better to add some brief motivation behind it. I suggested something. What do you think?

> [kapt](kapt.md) (Kotlin Annotation Processing Tool) lets you use Java annotation processors in Kotlin. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[kapt](kapt.md) (Kotlin Annotation Processing Tool) is a useful tool that lets you use Java annotation processors in Kotlin. 
```

It works by translating Kotlin source code into Java "stubs" and then running 

> the annotation processors on those stubs. This process is expensive, causes a significant increase in build time, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the annotation processors on those stubs. However, this process is expensive, significantly increases build time, 
```

and loses some Kotlin-specific features in translation.

> [KSP](ksp-overview.md) (Kotlin Symbol Processing) is an alternative to kapt designed specifically for Kotlin. KSP understands all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, [KSP](ksp-overview.md) (Kotlin Symbol Processing) is an alternative to kapt designed specifically for Kotlin. KSP understands all
```

> Kotlin features and analyzes the source code directly, reducing build speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kotlin features and analyzes the source code directly, reducing build times.
```
As I understand it, the speed itself doesn't change but the time taken does :)

> To check if the processors in your project support KSP, see the list of [supported libraries](ksp-overview.md#supported-libraries)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you begin, check whether the processors in your project support KSP. See the list of [supported libraries](ksp-overview.md#supported-libraries)
```

or consult their documentation.

> > Kapt and KSP can run alongside each other, so you can migrate your project in stages, one library or module at a time.

Reviewer 2: Sorry to chime in, kapt should be lowercase everywhere.

Author: I wasn't sure about the case when it's at the beginning of a sentence. Thanks!

> 
{style="note"}

## Add the KSP plugin to your project

> Add KSP to the `plugins {}` block in the project-level `build.gradle(.kts)`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add KSP to the `plugins {}` block in the project-level `build.gradle(.kts)` file:
```

    <tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

    ```kotlin
    dependencies {
        implementation("com.google.dagger:dagger:2.48")
        // kapt("com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48")
        // KSP processor dependency:
        ksp("com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48") 
    }
    ```

    </tab>
    <tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy"> 

    ```groovy
    dependencies {
        implementation 'com.google.dagger:dagger:2.48'
        // kapt 'com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48'
        // KSP processor dependency:
        ksp 'com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48'
    }
    ```

    </tab>
    </tabs>
    

> For most libraries, this replacement is enough. Check each library's
> documentation to see if you need to make any additional changes.
> 
{style="note"}

## Remove the kapt plugin

After migrating all your processors to KSP, you can safely remove the kapt plugin from all build files:

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
plugins {
   // Delete this line:
    id("org.jetbrains.kotlin.kapt")
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
plugins {
    // Delete this line:

>     id 'org.jetbrains.kotlin.kapt' // Delete this line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    id 'org.jetbrains.kotlin.kapt'
```

}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

> Delete any leftover kapt configurations if you have them.

Reviewer: Can you add a What's new section at the end with some useful links to KSP materials? :)

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
plugins {
    id("com.google.devtools.ksp") version "%kspVersion%" apply false 
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
plugins {
    id 'com.google.devtools.ksp' version '%kspVersion%' apply false 
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

> To find the latest version of KSP, check the GitHub [Releases](https://github.com/google/ksp/releases).
> 
{style="tip"}

## Update your processor

Find the module that uses the processor you want to migrate. In the module's `build.gradle(.kts)` file:

1. Add KSP to the `plugins {}` block:

    <tabs group="build-script">
    <tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

    ```kotlin
    plugins {
        id("com.google.devtools.ksp")
    }
    ```

    </tab>
    <tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

    ```groovy
    plugins {
        id 'com.google.devtools.ksp'
    }
    ```

    </tab>
    </tabs>
   
2. In the `dependencies {}` block, replace `kapt` with `ksp`:

    <tabs group="build-script">
    <tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

    ```kotlin
    dependencies {
        implementation("com.google.dagger:dagger:2.48")

>         // kapt("com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // kapt("com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48")
        
```
Adding  a newline to separate commented out code from an actual comment.

        // KSP processor dependency:
        ksp("com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48") 
    }
    ```

    </tab>
    <tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy"> 

    ```groovy
    dependencies {
        implementation 'com.google.dagger:dagger:2.48'

>         // kapt 'com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // kapt 'com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48'
        
```
Adding  a newline to separate commented out code from an actual comment.

        // KSP processor dependency:
        ksp 'com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48'
    }
    ```

    </tab>
    </tabs>
    

> For most libraries, this replacement is enough. Check each library's
> documentation to see if you need to make any additional changes.
> 
{style="note"}

## Remove the kapt plugin

After migrating all your processors to KSP, you can safely remove the kapt plugin from all build files:

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
plugins {
   // Delete this line:
    id("org.jetbrains.kotlin.kapt")
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
plugins {
    // Delete this line:
    id 'org.jetbrains.kotlin.kapt'
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

Delete any leftover kapt configurations if you have them.

> ## What's next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's next?
```
To make it consistent with Getting started with KSP.

> * Learn how to make your own KSP-based annotation processor in [Getting started with KSP](ksp-quickstart.md#create-your-own-processor)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Learn how to make your own KSP-based annotation processor in [Getting started with KSP](ksp-quickstart.md#create-your-own-processor).
```

[//]: # (title: Migrate from kapt to KSP)

> 

Reviewer: Can you add a sentence or two explaining the purpose of the page at the very beginning?

Author: Do you mean a `[//]: # (description: ...)`, a normal paragraph, or both? If both, can they have the same text or is that redundancy undesirable?

Reviewer: I meant just a normal paragraph but a `description` element would also be a good idea! However, the text shouldn't be the same. The `description` element is shorter and focusses on using key words so that the page shows up well in search results.

> [Kapt](kapt.md) (Kotlin Annotation Processing Tool) was created to allow Java annotation processors to be used in Kotlin. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Kapt](kapt.md) (Kotlin Annotation Processing Tool) lets you use Java annotation processors in Kotlin. 
```
To make it active.

> It works by first translating the Kotlin source code into Java "stubs" and then running 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It works by translating Kotlin source code into Java "stubs" and then running 
```
No article needed here since the amount of source code is uncountable :)

> the annotation processors on those stubs. This is an expensive process that causes a significant increase in build time, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
annotation processors on those stubs. This process is expensive, increases build time significantly, 
```
To make it clearer that the process is the subject.

> and some Kotlin-specific features are lost in translation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and loses some Kotlin-specific features in translation.
```
To make it active.

> [KSP](ksp-overview.md) (Kotlin Symbol Processing) is an alternative to kapt, designed specifically for Kotlin. KSP understands all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[KSP](ksp-overview.md) (Kotlin Symbol Processing) is an alternative to kapt designed specifically for Kotlin. KSP understands all
```

> Kotlin features and can analyze the source code directly, increasing build speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kotlin features and analyzes the source code directly, which improves build speed.
```
Usually we say that build times reduce rather than the speed increases. Will that work in this context?

Author: Yes :) I thought about this one for a while, and for some reason I decided "reduce" sounded negative and chose "improve" instead. But if it's what's generally done, "reduce" it is!

> To see if the processors in your project support KSP, check the [supported libraries](ksp-overview.md#supported-libraries)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check if the processors in your project support KSP, see the list of [supported libraries](ksp-overview.md#supported-libraries)
```

> or their own documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or consult their documentation.
```
Needs a verb here.

> > Kapt and KSP can run alongside each other. You can migrate your project in stages, one library or module at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Kapt and KSP can run alongside each other so you can migrate your project in stages, one library or module at a time.
```
I think it reads better if we connect these two sentences together. WDYT? :)

> 
{style="note"}

## Add the KSP plugin to your project

Add KSP to the `plugins {}` block in the project-level `build.gradle(.kts)`:

```kotlin
plugins {
    id("com.google.devtools.ksp") version "2.3.6" apply false 
}
```
> To find the latest version of KSP, check the GitHub [Releases](https://github.com/google/ksp/releases).

> {style=”tip”}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{style="tip"}
```

## Update your processor

> Identify the module in which the processor you want to migrate is used. In the module's `build.gradle(.kts)` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find the module that uses the processor you want to migrate. In the module's `build.gradle(.kts)` file:
```
To make it less formal and more active.

> 1. Add KSP to the `plugins {}` block:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the module's `build.gradle(.kts)` file, add KSP to the `plugins {}` block:
```
This is important and should be part of the first instruction.

Author: The 2nd point is for the same build file, that's why I put the file "outside" the instructions. Should I repeat it in both steps? It's currently so:

```
Fin the module (...). In the module's build.gradle.kts file:
1. add ... to plugins {} block
2. add ... to dependencies {} block
```

Do you prefer this version?

```
Find the module (...).
In the module's build.gradle.kts file, add ... to the plugins {} block:
// code block
And ... to the dependencies {} block:
// code block
```

Reviewer: Now the first sentence is clear, this isn't necessary anymore!

>     ```kotlin

Reviewer: Can you add tabs for the Groovy DSL as well? For all the samples :)

    plugins {
        id("com.google.devtools.ksp")
    }
    ```

> 2. Replace `kapt` with `KSP` in the `dependencies {}` block:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the `dependencies {}` block, replace `kapt` with `ksp`:
```
Should KSP be lowercase?

Author: Yes, the Gradle configuration is all lowercase

    ```kotlin
    dependencies {
        implementation("com.google.dagger:dagger:2.48")
        // kapt("com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48")

>         ksp("com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48") // KSP processor dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion

        // KSP processor dependency
        ksp("com.google.dagger:dagger-compiler:2.48") 
```
Since you can't see the code comment if it comes after the dependency I suggest a new line and then placing it on top of the KSP dependency.

    }
    ```

> For most libraries, this replacement is enough. Make sure to consult each specific library's

> > documentation to see if more changes are needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For most libraries, this replacement is enough. Check each library's
> documentation to see if you need to make additional changes.
```
Little bit more active :)

{style="note"}

## Remove the kapt plugin

> Once all your dependencies are included with KSP, you can safely remove the kapt plugin from all build files:

Reviewer: What does "included with KSP" mean? Do you mean, all processors have migrated from kapt to KSP as a dependency?

Author: Yes, I'll try different wording!

```kotlin
plugins {

>    id("org.jetbrains.kotlin.kapt") // Delete this line

Reviewer: `````suggestion
   // Delete this line
   id("org.jetbrains.kotlin.kapt") 
`````
I suggest moving the code comment above so that it can be seen in the sample window.

}
```

> Make sure to delete all leftover kapt configurations, if applicable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete any leftover kapt configurations if you have them.
```
A bit more direct and less formal.
